Wuertschen (#1484)
huggingface/blog: wuertschen.md

## How to use Würstchen?

The model is available through the Diffusers Library, so you can use the interface you are already familiar with. For example, this is how to run inference using the `AutoPipeline`:

```Python
import torch
from diffusers import AutoPipelineForText2Image
from diffusers.pipelines.wuerstchen import DEFAULT_STAGE_C_TIMESTEPS

pipeline = AutoPipelineForText2Image.from_pretrained("warp-ai/wuerstchen", torch_dtype=torch.float16).to("cuda")

caption = "Anthropomorphic cat dressed as a firefighter"
images = pipeline(
	caption,
	height=1024,
	width=1536,
	prior_timesteps=DEFAULT_STAGE_C_TIMESTEPS,
	prior_guidance_scale=4.0,
	num_images_per_prompt=4,
).images
```

![Anthropomorphic cat dressed as a fire-fighter](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/wuertschen/Anthropomorphic_cat_dressed_as_a_fire_fighter.jpg)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Diffusers integration

Because Würstchen is fully integrated in `diffusers`, it automatically comes with various goodies and optimizations out of the box. These include:

- Automatic use of PyTorch 2 `SDPA` accelerated attention, as described below.
- Support for the xFormers flash attention implementation, if you need to use PyTorch 1.x instead of 2.
- Model offload, to move unused components to CPU while they are not in use. This saves memory with negligible performance impact.
- Sequential CPU offload, for situations where memory is really precious. Memory use will be minimized, at the cost of slower inference.
- Prompt weighting with the Compel library.
- Support for the `mps` device on Apple Silicon macs.
- Use of generators for reproducibility.
- Sensible defaults for inference to produce high-quality results in most situations. Of course you can tweak all parameters as you wish!
```

Author: added

![Würstchen images with Prompts](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/wuertschen/generated_images.jpg)

## Why another text-to-image model?

Well, this one is pretty fast. Würstchen’s biggest benefits come from the fact that it can generate images much faster than models like Stable Diffusion XL while using much less memory. So for all the consumer graphic cards, who don’t have A100 lying around, this will come in handy. Here is a comparison with SDXL over different batch sizes.

> ![Inference Speed Plots](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/wuertschen/inference_speed_v2.jpg)

Reviewer: Is the left panel with SDPA?

Here is also a real-time comparison between both models and their inference speeds.

> However, probably the most significant benefit of Würstchen comes with the reduced training costs. Würstchen v1, which works at 512x512, required only 9.000 GPU hours of training. Comparing this to what Stable Diffusion 1.4 needed, namely 150,000 GPU hours, shows that this 16x reduction in costs not only benefits researchers when conducting new experiments, it also opens the doors for more companies to train such models. Würstchen v2 used 24,602 GPU hours. With resolutions going up to 1536, this is still 6x cheaper than SD1.4 which was only trained at 512x512.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to that, another greatly significant benefit of Würstchen comes with the reduced training costs. Würstchen v1, which works at 512x512, required only 9,000 GPU hours of training. Comparing this to the 150,000 GPU hours spent on Stable Diffusion 1.4 suggests that this 16x reduction in cost not only benefits researchers when conducting new experiments, but it also opens the door for more organizations to train such models. Würstchen v2 used 24,602 GPU hours. With resolutions going up to 1536, this is still 6x cheaper than SD1.4, which was only trained at 512x512.
```

Do we want to compare it with SDXL at 1024?

![Inference Speed Plots](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/wuertschen/compute_comparison.jpg)

You can also find a detailed explanation video here:

<iframe width="708" height="398" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/ogJsCPqgFMk" title="Efficient Text-to-Image Training (16x cheaper than Stable Diffusion) | Paper Explained" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## How to use Würstchen?

> The model is available through the Diffusers Library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The model is available through the Diffusers Library, so you can use the interface you are already familiar with. For example, this is how to run inference using the `AutoPipeline`:
```

```Python
import torch
from diffusers import AutoPipelineForText2Image
from diffusers.pipelines.wuerstchen import DEFAULT_STAGE_C_TIMESTEPS

pipeline = AutoPipelineForText2Image.from_pretrained("warp-ai/wuerstchen", torch_dtype=torch.float16).to("cuda")

caption = "Anthropomorphic cat dressed as a firefighter"
images = pipeline(
	caption,
	height=1024,
	width=1536,
	prior_timesteps=DEFAULT_STAGE_C_TIMESTEPS,
	prior_guidance_scale=4.0,
	num_images_per_prompt=4,
).images
```

![Anthropomorphic cat dressed as a fire-fighter](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/wuertschen/Anthropomorphic_cat_dressed_as_a_fire_fighter.jpg)

> 

Reviewer 2: What are the other (potentially more involved) ways of using the Wuerstchen model? I feel like we should include a note about that or at least link the official pipeline documentation, encouraging the readers to be aware of it. 

(I am referring to usage of two separate pipelines)

Reviewer: In addition to what @sayakpaul said, maybe a discussion on resolutions (what are the recommended ones, what's the range that works best) could be interesting.

Reviewer: Maybe this is also a good place to explain the pipeline components: prior, etc.

## Optimisation Technique 1: Flash Attention

> Starting from version 2.0, PyTorch has integrated a highly optimised and resource-friendly version of the attention mechanism called [`torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention`](https://pytorch.org/docs/master/generated/torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention) or SDPA. Depending on the nature of the input, this function taps into multiple inherent optimisations. Its performance and memory efficiency outshine the traditional attention model. Remarkably, the SDPA function mirrors the characteristics of the *flash attention* technique, as highlighted in the research paper [Fast and Memory-Efficient Exact Attention with IO-Awareness](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.14135) penned by Dao and team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting from version 2.0, PyTorch has integrated a highly optimised and resource-friendly version of the attention mechanism called [`torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention`](https://pytorch.org/docs/master/generated/torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention) or SDPA. Depending on the nature of the input, this function taps into multiple underlying optimisations. Its performance and memory efficiency outshine the traditional attention model. Remarkably, the SDPA function mirrors the characteristics of the *flash attention* technique, as highlighted in the research paper [Fast and Memory-Efficient Exact Attention with IO-Awareness](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.14135) penned by Dao and team.
```

If you're using Diffusers with PyTorch 2.0 or a later version, and the SDPA function is accessible, these enhancements are automatically applied. Get started by setting up torch 2.0 or a newer version using the [official guidelines](https://pytorch.org/get-started/locally/)! 

```python
images = pipeline(caption, height=1024, width=1536, prior_timesteps=DEFAULT_STAGE_C_TIMESTEPS, prior_guidance_scale=4.0, num_images_per_prompt=4).images
```

> For an in-depth look at how SDPA is integrated within `diffusers`, check out the dedicated [documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/optimization/torch2.0).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For an in-depth look at how `diffusers` leverages SDPA, check out the [documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/optimization/torch2.0).
```

If you're on a version of Pytorch earlier than 2.0, you can still achieve memory-efficient attention using the [xFormers](https://facebookresearch.github.io/xformers/) library:

```Python
pipeline.enable_xformers_memory_efficient_attention()
```

## Optimisation Technique 2: Torch Compile

If you're on the hunt for an extra performance boost, you can make use of `torch.compile`. It is best to apply it to both the prior's

> and decoder's main model for the biggest increase in performance.

Reviewer: We haven't discussed the `prior` model yet. Maybe clarify when we introduce the different Stages in the beginning of the post.

```python
pipeline.prior_prior = torch.compile(pipeline.prior_prior , mode="reduce-overhead", fullgraph=True)
pipeline.decoder = torch.compile(pipeline.decoder, mode="reduce-overhead", fullgraph=True)
```

> Bear in mind, after running this the first time, the initial inference step will take a while to compile for both models. This can take up to 2 minutes. After that you can just normally run the inference: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bear in mind that the initial inference step will take a long time (up to 2 minutes) while the models are being compiled. After that you can just normally run inference: 
```

```python
images = pipeline(caption, height=1024, width=1536, prior_timesteps=DEFAULT_STAGE_C_TIMESTEPS, prior_guidance_scale=4.0, num_images_per_prompt=4).images
```

> And the good news is that this compilation is a one-time execution. Post that, you're set to experience faster inferences consistently for the same image resolutions. The initial time investment in compilation is quickly offset by the subsequent speed benefits. For a deeper dive into `torch.compile` and its nuances, check out the [torch compile](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_tutorial.html) documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And the good news is that this compilation is a one-time execution. Post that, you're set to experience faster inferences consistently for the same image resolutions. The initial time investment in compilation is quickly offset by the subsequent speed benefits. For a deeper dive into `torch.compile` and its nuances, check out the [official documentation](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_tutorial.html).
```

> 

Reviewer 2: If we have some benchmarking numbers and a script, I would also link them here.

> 

Reviewer 2: @pcuenca @kashif let's add a section on the things that are provided by `diffusers` right off the bat for better enablement? 

Or are we skipping it?

> ## Resources

Reviewer 2: I think it's much better to add the resource links in bullet points:

* Model checkpoints
* Pipeline documentation 
* Demo 

Related question: Should we embed the demo in the blog post? I highly recommend doing so.

Reviewer: Agree to both! I can't edit the post in this branch, but this should work:

```
<script type="module" src="https://gradio.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/3.42.0/gradio.js"> </script>
<gradio-app theme_mode="light" space="warp-ai/Wuerstchen"></gradio-app>
```

Maybe put it near the beginning of the post?

Author: done both

<gradio-app theme_mode="light" space="warp-ai/Wuerstchen"></gradio-app>

Otherwise, the model is available through the Diffusers Library, so you can use the interface you are already familiar with. For example, this is how to run inference using the `AutoPipeline`:

```Python
import torch
from diffusers import AutoPipelineForText2Image
from diffusers.pipelines.wuerstchen import DEFAULT_STAGE_C_TIMESTEPS

pipeline = AutoPipelineForText2Image.from_pretrained("warp-ai/wuerstchen", torch_dtype=torch.float16).to("cuda")

caption = "Anthropomorphic cat dressed as a firefighter"
images = pipeline(
	caption,
	height=1024,
	width=1536,
	prior_timesteps=DEFAULT_STAGE_C_TIMESTEPS,
	prior_guidance_scale=4.0,
	num_images_per_prompt=4,
).images
```

![Anthropomorphic cat dressed as a fire-fighter](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/wuertschen/Anthropomorphic_cat_dressed_as_a_fire_fighter.jpg)

### Diffusers integration
Because Würstchen is fully integrated in `diffusers`, it automatically comes with various goodies and optimizations out of the box. These include:

> - Automatic use of PyTorch 2 `SDPA` accelerated attention, as described below.
> - Support for the xFormers flash attention implementation, if you need to use PyTorch 1.x instead of 2.
> - Model offload, to move unused components to CPU while they are not in use. This saves memory with negligible performance impact.
> - Sequential CPU offload, for situations where memory is really precious. Memory use will be minimized, at the cost of slower inference.
> - Prompt weighting with the [Compel](https://github.com/damian0815/compel) library.
> - Support for the `mps` device on Apple Silicon macs.
> - Use of generators for reproducibility.
> - Sensible defaults for inference to produce high-quality results in most situations. Of course you can tweak all parameters as you wish!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Automatic use of [PyTorch 2 `SDPA`](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/optimization/torch2.0) accelerated attention, as described below.
- Support for the [xFormers flash attention](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/optimization/xformers) implementation, if you need to use PyTorch 1.x instead of 2.
- [Model offload](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/optimization/fp16#model-offloading-for-fast-inference-and-memory-savings), to move unused components to CPU while they are not in use. This saves memory with negligible performance impact.
- [Sequential CPU offload](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/optimization/fp16#offloading-to-cpu-with-accelerate-for-memory-savings), for situations where memory is really precious. Memory use will be minimized, at the cost of slower inference.
- [Prompt weighting](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/using-diffusers/weighted_prompts) with the [Compel](https://github.com/damian0815/compel) library.
- Support for the [`mps` device](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/optimization/mps) on Apple Silicon macs.
- Use of generators for [reproducibility](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/using-diffusers/reproducibility).
- Sensible defaults for inference to produce high-quality results in most situations. Of course you can tweak all parameters as you wish!
```

Adding some links to the docs.
